# Typelevel Scala 2.11.8

The Typelevel Scala additions to Lightbend Scala 2.11.8 can be found on the branch
[2.11.8-bin-typelevel][2.11.8-bin-typelevel] of this repository.

Typelevel Scala 2.11.8 offers the following fixes and features over Lightbend Scala 2.11.8,

+ Support for partial unification (ie. a fix for [SI-2712][SI-2712]) &mdash; merged in Lightbend Scala 2.12.0-RC1 and
  2.11.9

  An improvement to type inference for type constructors, enabled by the `-Ypartial-unification` scalac option. This
  has many benefits for libraries, such as Cats and Scalaz, which make extensive use of higher-kinded types.

  Full details on the [pull request][pr-2712].
+ Support for literal types (aka SIP-23) &mdash; proposed for Lightbend Scala 2.12.1.

  Implements [literal types][SIP-23]. Enabled by `-Yliteral-types`.

  Literals can now appear in type position, designating the corresponding singleton type. A `scala.ValueOf[T]` type
  class and corresponding `scala.Predef.valueOf[T]` operator has been added yielding the unique value of types with a
  single inhabitant. Support for `scala.Symbol` literal types has been added.
+ A partial fix for SI-7046 &mdash; proposed for Lightbend Scala 2.12.1 and merged in 2.11.9.

  The macro API call `knownDirectSubclasses` now yields the correct result in most cases and will report an error in
  cases where it is unable to yield the correct result.

  This is only a partial fix because subclasses defined in local scopes might be missed by `knownDirectSubclasses`. In
  mitigation it is very likely that a local subclass would represent an error in any scenario where
  `knownDirectSubclasses` might be used. An error will be reported in these cases.

  Full details on the [pull request][pr-7046].
+ A fix for SI-9760 &mdash; merged in Lightbend Scala 2.12.0-RC1 and 2.11.9.

  Higher kinded type arguments are now refined by GADT pattern matching. Details can be found on [the
  ticket][SI-9760].

Note that Typelevel Scala 2.11.8 replaces the [si2712fix compiler plugin][si2712fix-plugin] &mdash; if you are using
it you should remove it from your build before switching to Typelevel Scala.

## How to use Typelevel Scala 2.11.8 with SBT

There are two requirements for using Typelevel Scala in your existing projects,

+ You must be using (or be able to switch to) Lightbend Scala 2.11.8.
+ You must be using (or be able to switch to) SBT 0.13.13 or later. Earlier versions of SBT don't have full support
  for using an alternative `scalaOrganization`.

If these conditions are met the following steps will build your project with Typelevel Scala,

+ Ensure that your `project/build.properties` specifies SBT 0.13.13,

  ```
  sbt.version=0.13.13
  ```

+ Add the following to your `build.sbt` immediately next to where you set `scalaVersion`,

  ```
  scalaOrganization in ThisBuild := "org.typelevel"
  ```

  Alternatively, if you want to try Typelevel Scala without modifying your `build.sbt` you can instead create a file
  `local.sbt` at the root of your project with the following content,

  ```
  scalaOrganization in ThisBuild := "org.typelevel"
  ```

  This will be merged with your main build definitions and can be added to `.gitignore` or `.git/info/exclude` if so
  desired.

Now your build should function as before but using the Typelevel Scala toolchain instead of the Lightbend one. You can
verify this from the SBT prompt,

```
> show scalaOrganization
[info] org.typelevel
>
```

## How to use Typelevel Scala 2.11.8 with Maven

If you are using maven with the `scala-maven-plugin`, set the `<scalaOrganization>` to `org.typelevel`,

```
<plugin>
  <groupId>net.alchim31.maven</groupId>
  <artifactId>scala-maven-plugin</artifactId>
  <version>3.2.1</version>
  <configuration>
    <scalaOrganization>org.typelevel</scalaOrganization>
  </configuration>
</plugin>
```

[SI-2712]: https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-2712
[pr-2712]: https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/5102
[SI-7046]: https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-7046
[pr-7046]: https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/5284
[SI-9760]: https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-9760
[SIP-23]: https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/5310
[2.11.8-bin-typelevel]: https://github.com/typelevel/scala/commits/2.11.8-bin-typelevel
